A study of the incidence of kidney cancer in the 3,141 counties of the
United States reveals a remarkable pattern. The counties in which
the incidence of kidney cancer is lowest are mostly rural, sparsely
populated, and located in traditionally Republican states in the Midwest,
the South, and the West. What do you make of this?
    Your mind has been very active in the last few seconds, and it was
mainly a System 2 operation. You deliberately searched memory and
formulated hypotheses. Some effort was involved; your pupils dilated, and
your heart rate increased measurably. But System 1 was not idle: the
operation of System 2 depended on the facts and suggestions retrieved
from associative memory. You probably rejected the idea that Republican
politics provide protection against kidney cancer. Very likely, you ended up
focusing on the fact that the counties with low incidence of cancer are
mostly rural. The witty statisticians Howard Wainer and Harris Zwerling,
from whom I learned this example, commented, “It is both easy and
tempting to infer that their low cancer rates are directly due to the clean
living of the rural lifestyle—no air pollution, no water pollution, access to
fresh food without additives.” This makes perfect sense.
    Now consider the counties in which the incidence of kidney cancer is
highest. These ailing counties tend to be mostly rural, sparsely populated,
and located in traditionally Republican states in the Midwest, the South,
and the West. Tongue-in-cheek, Wainer and Zwerling comment: “It is easy
to infer that their high cancer rates might be directly due to the poverty of
the rural lifestyle—no access to good medical care, a high-fat diet, and too
much alcohol, too much tobacco.” Something is wrong, of course. The rural
lifestyle cannot explain both very high and very low incidence of kidney
cancer.
    The key factor is not that the counties were rural or predominantly
Republican. It is that rural counties have small populations. And the main
lesson to be learned is not about epidemiology, it is about the difficult
relationship between our mind and statistics. System 1 is highly adept in
one form of thinking—it automatically and effortlessly identifies causal
connections between events, sometimes even when the connection is
spurious. When told about the high-incidence counties, you immediately
assumed that these counties are different from other counties for a reason,
that there must be a cause that explains this difference. As we shall see,
however, System 1 is inept when faced with “merely statistical” facts, which
change the probability of outcomes but do not cause them to happen